- Hey, Pablo. Hey, Matt. - Hello.
- Great to have you both here. I'm very excited to talk about some cool tools that give us
a nice internal look inside of our Python apps.
- Yeah, I'm really excited to talk about these tools as well.
- Yeah, it sounds like you've been working on them for a couple of years, you two, and
especially Pablo and it's going to be great.
So that's looking at sort of debugging Python apps
and even Python apps that have crashed,
which is really, really fantastic.
Maybe some profiling as well.
- Maybe crashing apps is not that fantastic, brother.
(laughs)
But debugging them maybe.
- Right.
- Exactly.
I'm so excited my app crashed
because I get to use this PyStack tool
that you all worked on.
- For a while I actually was
because that means that I could use it.
But let's keep that secret.
- Well, you need test cases, right?
And you need examples.
- I was about to say exactly that.
It's a great way to see if we have any bugs.
It's a great chance to try things out.
- Meta debugging, if you're trying to debug the debugger.
- Oh, we have done that for sure.
- How funny, awesome.
Well, let's just have a quick round of introductions
from you guys before we can jump into it.
- Absolutely, Matt, wanna go first?
- Sure, I am Matt Wisniewski.
I'm a senior software engineer at Bloomberg.
I originally joined in 2009, I think,
so I've been around for quite a while.
I work on the Python infrastructure team at Bloomberg,
so our job is building tools and libraries
and maintaining the interpreters for use
by other teams at Bloomberg.
- Right on, sounds very fun.
Pablo?
- Hey, I'm Pablo Alino.
Apart from working at Bloomer
in exactly the same things as Matt,
because he's my coworker,
I do a bunch of things in the Python community.
So let me see if I don't miss anything.
So I'm in the Python team council.
I think this is my third year.
I'm also the release manager of 3.10 and 3.11.
3.10 is going into security fixes,
and today I actually need to do the last one.
So that's kind of exciting, I suppose.
- You have a 3.10 release coming today?
- Yes, the 3.12 beta one,
I think we are also releasing 3.11 and 3.10.
Like 3.11 is a bug fix, 3.10 is a first security release,
which means it's source only.
And it's my first security release as well.
But I think that makes it easier, hopefully.
- Yeah, and you were on the podcast before
talking about the actual release of 3.11
and that whole process.
So if people wanna go back and look
and see that in more detail, that was really fun.
We broke GitHub, so that's an exciting time
when we release 3.11.
So yeah, and I'm also in the Python core team,
mainly working on the parser and the garbage collector,
and therefore breaking black auto-formatters a lot
with new syntax.
- Yeah, and fastercpython, you can't forget fastercpython.
- Oh, right, right, right, sorry,
and I'm collaborating with the fastercpython team as well.
Yes, sorry, I just see you, I always forget something.
And as far as community stuff goes,
I'd be remiss if I didn't mention that I am a moderator
on the Python Discord, too.
So if anyone is not a member of Python Discord,
they should join.
It's a cool place to hang out.
>>Awesome.
Yeah, we'll put a link to that in the show notes as well,
so people can check that out.
So you all are busy is what I hear you saying.
>>Yes.
>>Absolutely.
All right, excellent.
- Well, let's maybe set the stage
for talking about PyStack here.
The first thing I wanna talk about is just what,
well, hold on, I do wanna point out,
you said you both work on the infrastructure team
at Bloomberg.
I'm not sure people fully appreciate
how much Python is happening at Bloomberg.
So maybe we should just give a big picture
because it's germane to this conversation,
PySnack and other tools like Memray, which we may get a chance to talk about if we have time.
Those are coming out of supporting this large community. And I got a sense of how big Python
is at Bloomberg when there were 60 engineers from Bloomberg at PyCon and everybody's booth
duty was measured in minutes. - Right, right. And they didn't copy paste the same engineer 60 times.
Yeah, it's quite wild. So I can start if you want.
It's very interesting, actually, that you point this out,
because Bloomberg, being a very old company,
you know, when people talk about legacy,
and it's like, "Oh, we have legacy because we have this Python 2.7 script."
Well, just you should see what a company that started in the '70s can do about that.
But it used to be a C++ house.
And when I started, actually, the main language were C++
and JavaScript for the front end in Bloomberg terminal.
And now we are actually, I think I'm, if I'm not mistaken, Matt can correct me,
but I think we can say probably that now we have Python house
because I think we just surpassed for the first time
the amount of lines of Python compared with C++.
And if that's not true, it's mostly there, which is quite exciting.
At the point where I joined the company,
we had onboarding training for juniors
that included a Fortran for C programmers section.
And at this point, we have a C++ for Python programmers
section instead.
So that's how much it's changed over the last decade or so.
>> Wow, that's incredible.
>> That's what I mean, the C++ is now legacy.
Who said that?
Certainly not me.
The steering council member says that.
[LAUGHTER]
OK, so yeah.
But this is interesting.
and this goes into the tool itself.
I think this is an interesting scenario
because that C++ didn't went away.
Among other things, because it's not legacy,
Python is not the fastest language on the planet,
although we are trying to make it fast,
but certainly we are not trying to make it compete
with C++.
So that C++ is both there and needed
because you cannot just do everything in Python, for sure.
So the situation that we have at Bloomberg,
which is served by many other big companies,
and finance companies as well, is that we have a lot of C++ under that Python.
So, the... Well, C++ by itself, but let's talk about the actual part
that is interesting for Python.
So, you can write a lot of pure Python scripts, right?
But what most people, or companies, does is write some Python
and 99% of the time, it ends up reaching some C++ underneath.
And this is not just because they are using NumPy or Pandas
or any of these compile very common scenarios as well,
but also because they are using Bloomberg code underneath,
which happens to be written in C++.
And this means that now we have a huge community of people
that need to be aware of both languages at the same time.
So you have Python programmers that need to be aware of C++,
as well as C++ programmers that need to be aware of Python,
either because they just happen to switch to Python
or because they use Python to run tests or things like that.
So it's a very interesting scenario.
>> Yeah, and I imagine, leading up to this conversation,
if something goes wrong, you might not be entirely sure.
Is it the Python code?
Is it the C++ code?
Is it the interaction of these things?
Right? That can make it tricky.
>> And this is quite, what you point out is basically,
among all the things, one of the things that make us work
on this in the first place, because what happened normally
is that when an application, one of these applications
is hybrid crash at Bloomberg, we used to have this,
many companies does this, I mean, I assume all of them,
but what happened is that when an application crashes,
we either get a core file, right,
which is this kind of like file that is dumped by the kernel
with all the memory dump of the process
and a bunch of information, and you can analyze it later,
or a debugger basically attaches to the process
and shows you the backtrace.
But the problem is that this debugger was GDB,
which means that the backtrace that you get
is a C backtrace, it's not a Python backtrace, right?
And the backtrace is useless for everyone.
So it's like, it doesn't matter if you're a C++ programmer
or you're a Python programmer, it's always useless.
It's useless for Python programmers
because you see C functions,
and like a Python programmer normally is like,
what is this?
Like, what is that register, right?
Well, on the other hand,
it's also useless for C++ programmers
because the function that evaluates Python code,
which is called PyEvalEvalFrameDefault,
is repeated 600 times, and it doesn't make any sense.
Not only they also expect to see their Python code,
but now their C++ code is just buried
among this mysterious code.
So nobody could make sense of what's going on,
which means that for a long time,
when a Python application crashed at Bloomberg,
and we're talking crash here as like hard crash,
like segfault, which is common in C++ segfaults,
or sometimes even Python can segfault, right?
In some situations.
So obviously, a Python exception is reported as a Python exception.
We are not talking that our system picked GDB.
If a Python exception is raised, obviously, that is fine.
It's when this kind of hybrid setup crashes very deeply,
either because Python crashes or because NumPy crashes
or because the Bloomberg code crashes.
So in those cases, nobody could make sense of what's going on
because the backtracing is useless by itself.
And not just crashes.
I'd add that it's also a problem for deadlocks as well.
One of the big differences between Python and C++,
they've got very different models
for how they represent the lifetimes of objects
and things like that.
You can very easily get into a situation
where a C++ object that is owned by a Python object
in our hybrid work environment is trying to communicate
with a background thread to, I don't know,
tell it to stop or something like that.
But that background thread winds up needing
to pick up the GIL for some reason.
And if you have the foreground thread still holding the gill,
you've just introduced a deadlock.
And it's very difficult to track that down
if the only tool at your disposal is GDB
and you can't easily see what Python stuff is being called.
- Yeah, and Python, oh, sorry, C++ multithreading
is like critical sections and locks,
and it's really explicit.
You enter a lock, you exit a lock,
and Python has that as well.
But in addition, it just has this implicit gill
that you're talking about, right?
And that throws a whole nother layer
of potential deadlocks in there that I imagine
is pretty tricky.
- And some of them are not only difficult to spot,
but it's very difficult to reason about
just because most of these things are implicit.
It's so difficult actually that even if you go to some popular tools in the wild, they
don't handle all the S cases because it's quite hardcore.
The fact that you can just request the gil in the middle of, for instance, I don't know
if we will end talking about memory profilers here, but most memory profilers that are measuring
like native allocations in Python and C++, they need to see the Python stack somehow.
When an allocation is made, you say, "Oh, give me some memory."
you need to say who called this function.
And then you need to see both the C sometimes,
or you only call Python, you just need to say,
okay, what is the Python stack trace, right?
Like an exception, but like, who called this function?
And for that, you need the gil.
So you need to say, give me the gil,
and then I will print the stack.
But like sometimes, one of the situations
that Matt is describing will introduce a dialogue.
It's very, very rare situations,
but it's the kind of situations that will involve threads
and like, you know, specific things.
which means that it will happen very, very rarely,
but it will happen, or it can happen.
So it's both going to be rare to debug
because this person who's going to appear
when the moon is high and Wednesday,
so he's going to say, "Well, only in this case is the deck looks."
And it's going to be very difficult to fix as well
because now you cannot just have the Guild,
so you need a complete redesign sometimes.
So it can be very challenging to fix, to find,
and to debug as well.
- Those situations are so tricky.
You know, they often get the term Heisenbugs
to indicate kind of the quantum mechanical uncertainty.
It could be in some state, but if you measure it,
then it's in a different state.
How do you actually track these down?
And they happen a lot of times in production,
but only under heavy load after like 12 hours.
So how do you use normal debugging techniques
to step through that?
All these things are really, really tricky.
But it sounds like--
- And they're also-- - Okay.
- They are very also interesting as well.
We can certainly discuss exactly what you just said
because it's spot on.
And one of the reasons here is that, as you mentioned,
the moment you touch a debugger,
because the debugging process normally slows down the code,
means that reproducing the dialogue may be harder.
So sometimes the only way to properly debug this thing
is letting it crash without the debugger,
producing a core file and then analyzing the core file.
But because the core file is dead,
I mean, it's basically a dump, you cannot call functions now,
then GDB can be useless
if you don't know how to use certain tools.
So PyStack actually is very useful here as well
because you can reproduce the deadlock at full speed,
generating a core or letting it crash,
and then use PyStack. But we can talk about that later.
Or maybe you don't know that you're
trying to reproduce a deadlock.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
And you're like, it won't respond,
but the CPU load on the server is zero.
That--
>>Right.
[CHUCKLES]
>>Yeah, that sort of-- is it waiting for something,
or is it ever going to respond, or you just
don't know what it's doing yet?
>>Yeah, yeah, exactly.
Logging will help a little bit, but not--
you've got to have some pretty intense logging to get
that level of what's going on.
And usually you don't want that in production either.
So let's start our conversation about just the spectrum
of what the options are out there, Pablo.
Now, you mentioned GDB,
but I guess on one side of the spectrum,
we have PyCharm and VS Code and Friends
where you press F5 or you press the little debug thing
and you step through your code.
And that's helpful when you're actually developing
your application, but you're talking about
running a production or running applications
or applications that have crashed and here's a core file.
Those are not exactly the same situation, are they?
- Right, so we are talking about the specific case.
We are sending ourselves into many scenarios,
although you can certainly use it in others,
but just to have a good mental model
over what these tools are going to be useful for
and what are they different from PDB or VS Code, right?
We're talking about things that crash
and crash like hard crash, like, you know,
or things that are frozen.
It could be a deadlock, but it could be also
that your application is waiting for something
and it never arrives and you want to know what is going on.
And specifically when these tools
are going to become even more useful
is when this code involves C++ or C code or RAS code,
for that matter, so some native code, right?
And the reason this is going to be more useful
is because PDB or VS Code, the buyer,
or PyCharm normally attach Python to the buyers,
which means that these buyers
only know about the Python world,
and that normally is insufficient
because you want to see both worlds at the same time.
And this is going to become very critical.
You don't want to be one world and the other separately.
You want some tool that understands both worlds
at the same time and can show you what really is happening
and how this works, like you're entering one word,
leaving it, but then you're entering again
or something like that.
So that is what we are-- - Right, so if you've got
this mixed code, you know, a Python profiler won't,
they won't see the steps happening
below that, right? - Right, so for instance,
a Bloomberg, a Python profiler will tell you
that the application, if it's, let's say it's frozen,
and then you say, you use VS Code,
it's going to tell you that it's frozen on run,
a function called run, and then there's 600 layers
of C++ underneath, which ones you don't know.
Or, for instance, let's say for mysterious reasons
that NumPy has a bug or something,
and then you're adding two NumPy arrays,
and it's telling you that the addition of the NumPy arrays
is what is being frozen,
but you don't know what is happening underneath.
And then you want to see what's happening
on the NumPy C++ code, or the SciPy code,
or the TensorFlow code.
There are countless examples of heavy C++
or compile code underneath.
Like for instance, Pythontic these days is running on Rust,
which means that if something goes wrong there,
or it just crashes or is freezing or whatever,
you're going to not see it either, right?
So we are talking about those cases.
- Right.
- We've seen deadlocks on the GC-Dell
of a object that's defined in an extension module.
And when that happens, all the Python debugger
is gonna tell you is absolutely nothing.
It doesn't see the call into the tpdel method.
It doesn't see...
All it shows you is that there is a variable that's going out of scope
or being reassigned or something like that
on the last Python line that was run,
and anything happening under that is just totally opaque to it.
Right.
On the other hand, just talking about the other tools,
on the other hand, things like GDB
have the same problem that we're talking about.
GDB only understands C code.
So what it's going to show you is that
your interpreter is going to show you the NumPy code underneath
or the C++ code underneath or the Rust code underneath.
But it's not going to show you the Python code, so you don't know what code that is.
So this is the other side of the coin.
You're going to see...
- There's a lot of C action happening.
- But how I reach this C, we don't know.
And the situation when this is really bad is when you kind of enter and exit the C
realm multiple times, right?
So you have some Python code that calls some C code, and in turn,
it calls some Python code again and some C code again.
So that's really hard because you're going to not see anything.
It's impossible because you don't know how you reach this situation.
And that's quite hard.
The classic debuggers won't be able to do so.
Interestingly, though, because we are going to see
that there is some other tools that have some functionality
close to what PyStack does.
So in Python, in CPython, we provide some plugins, let's call it.
It's basically an extension files that you can add to GDB
that allows you to do some similar things.
So for instance, the Python files that you can put in GDB
allows you to pretty print Python objects.
So even if you're in the C world, you can print some objects.
And you can also print some kind of Python stack tree.
So you can ask, "Hey, can you show me what I'm in Python?"
But it's not a hybrid one.
So it will only tell you where you're in Python,
which means that you're going to miss the C version.
Because this GDB, you can also ask for the C version,
but you're not going to see them together.
You're going to see either one or the other.
And then it's up to you how to merge them,
which sometimes is very hard because there's very hard rules
to know how to do that, especially, for instance,
in Python 3.11 and some of the optimizations
within the Python 3, in the Fastest in Python project
means that the same evaluator loop can be reused
for multiple Python functions.
So in 3.11, you are not even able to do it
without extra metadata.
So it's quite hard.
And even if these, let's say,
plugins are actually useful and can get you closer,
and for a lot of time, that was useful
and the only way to do that,
it's difficult for Core files,
because if you have a Core file, your only option is using DDB
or WASP before Biostack.
You could somehow do it.
The problem is that DDB relies on...
to do this relies on debugging information inside the core.
Which means that if you have Python interpreters
that don't have the right information, which by the way,
is most Python interpreters that are shipping distributions,
or most Python interpreters that are used normally
because you don't want to ship gigantic debugging information
to production most of the time,
because this can get really big.
Means that GDB is not going to work
because it relies on the fact that it can inspect
local C variables inside the frames.
And as many C programmers will tell you,
is the most common thing that DDB will tell you
is optimized expression,
which means that I cannot tell you anything here,
which means there is no one to work.
There is ways to make it work,
but we are entering the expert realm here.
Like, making DDB kind of work here
is the kind of like, you need two staff engineers
and like, or a CPython coder
that knows what is going on.
So that's certainly not for your average Python program,
which let's remember, we are trying to debug something,
which probably we're under pressure,
and we don't want to read the main page of GDB and Python
and how to debug Python with GDB and debugging,
what is the debugging information?
So if you're a Python programmer and just want to paste a stack trace
in a bug report, for instance, because someone asked you to do that,
or you just want to see what's going on,
or you just want to tell someone where it's crashing,
you don't want to learn all of these things,
You don't even have time. Maybe you need to fix it.
It's crashing in production.
You cannot just tell your boss, "Oh, yes, wait here
until I read the man page of GDB."
It's not going to happen.
- I don't know how many people, I imagine a good number,
but not all of the people listening have had an application
or an API or something crashing in production
when people are trying to get to it. It's very stressful.
- Right.
- I should add that distributions do generally give you a way
to get at the debug data for an interpreter.
It's not as though they strip it off entirely
and it's gone forever.
It's just that the way that you get at it after the fact
is different per distribution.
And it's not something that necessarily everyone
who's firing up GDB knows how to do.
So it's not that it's gone forever.
It's just that it's not easily accessible to everyone,
I'd say.
- Sure.
- And sometimes it doesn't even--
- Do you add it afterwards?
Like if my app crashes and I'm like,
"Oh, no, I didn't have the debug information."
You can, actually. It'll either be like on Ubuntu,
it'll be a Python 3-debug package that you install,
or there's also a thing called DebugInfoD
that can download the debug information
from servers managed by your distribution
as needed when a debugger requests it,
which is pretty cool.
But the problem is that this still doesn't assure you
that GDB is going to work.
It's just that it gives you more chances,
but still, if your Python interpreter is heavily optimized,
this may be not enough.
And actually, for the sake of giving data,
in most distributions, it's actually not enough
because these variables, particularly the frame variable
in the Python evaluator loop, is extremely heavily optimized
among other things because it has to be
because the Python evaluator loop is very hot path.
So most of the time, these tools are, let's say, unreliable.
So let's introduce what PyStack does then,
and let's talk about also what other tools you can use
that are not PyStack maybe.
- Yeah, sure.
So I think that's probably a good setup for PyStack.
Like why does it exist?
Why do people really, why is it such a game changer?
Right?
It understands both of these worlds in a really nice way.
Tell us about it.
- Exactly.
So the short version, because, and this is quite funny
because when we were at PyCon,
we were presenting both projects that we maintain here,
PyStack and Memory.
And Memory, everybody knew, but PyStack was the new one.
And a lot of people didn't kind of catch
exactly what it does,
and it's actually easier to explain than the profiler,
which I think is quite funny that it was the other way.
So the PyStack, what it does is very simple.
So PyStack is a tool when you give it a Python program
that is running or frozen, right?
But let's say it's alive, or a core file,
And it will tell you what it's doing.
So it will give you the stack trace basically.
So it's going to tell you, okay,
so this Python program has these many threads
and for every thread is going to show you the stack trace.
So this function is calling this function
is calling this function and is running currently.
- Like a snapshot in time, right?
When you asked it, it's like, boom,
what are all the threads doing?
- Exactly.
So the program is running,
which you can absolutely run PyStack
on a healthy running program.
It's going to tell you what it was doing at that time.
So by default, it's going to stop the program
for a super small amount of time.
It's going to take a photo of what the program is doing
and it's going to tell you what everything was doing.
So who calls who and what the program
was actually running at the time.
The program is frozen because you have a log
or something like that.
It's going to show you what is blocked basically.
And if you have a core file because your program crash
or because you generate one on demand,
because by the way,
you can absolutely generate one core on demand,
just take a snapshot and it's there.
It will tell you what the program was doing,
with the core was generated.
And this is a-
- That's what you can do in Linux, just in the terminal.
You can just say, take a core dump of some running process.
- Yep. For instance, you can do it with GDB
or with a utility that sells out to GDB called Gcore.
Which is installed by default when you install GDB.
And the cherry on the top here is that
it will tell you both what the Python code and the C code.
So it will tell you like,
okay, so we are calling these Python functions,
you know, main and main calls,
createDictionary and createDictionary calls
and NumPy array, but then when it enters C code,
the C Realm is going to show you also the C calls.
And then if it enters Python again,
it's going to show you Python again and C again.
And it's going to tell you if it's Python or C.
And also it's going to show you the code that is running.
So if the source code is available, which most time it is,
it's going to show you exactly what line,
like the same thing as a Traceback.
Basically it's going to show you what line was running.
And very cool as well, since Python 3.11,
is you can just use the, what sub-expression is running.
Because in Python 3.11, we have this vector error project
that I started.
And now we have line, sorry, column information.
So we know you have a very complicated expression
and something crashes, we can point you exactly
to what part of the expression was generating the crash.
But now we can use the same information in this tool
to show you what part of the expression was running.
So for instance, you were adding four NumPy arrays
and the application crashes
adding the second and the third one,
we can show you, okay, it's crashing,
adding the second and the third one.
So you can know exactly that was that operation
and not the other one, which is quite cool.
And the same for C.
- It sounds awesome.
I also like the description here.
PyStack is a tool that uses forbidden magic
to let you inspect the stack frames.
I love the process.
- I got a funny trivia.
I got a funny conversation with Mark Shannon.
We worked together on the 5.30 Python project
because we say here nasty CPython internals.
Which mostly, you know, we were into
what is a nasty CPython internal
because we both do those nasty CPython internals.
But you know, I think nobody really enjoys
internal CPython, not even Core Devs.
So there you go.
- Well, and I imagine that you're making your life harder
3.11 all of you.
>> Yeah, yeah.
I mean, this is kind of weird because I'm making my own job
harder every single time.
So I work on Python.
I'm happy.
And then I'm sad because I just make my own life harder
on the other side of the pool, right?
>> This is a project that would be much, much harder to maintain
if Pablo wasn't around to help on it.
Because, yeah, in order to keep this forbidden magic working,
we do need to keep up with changes to the interpreter.
And it's a place where if we didn't have core devs telling
what changed in the interpreter, it would be very hard to keep up with those changes and figure out
what has changed. >> Especially since the faster CPython stuff has kicked into gear. >> Right.
One thing here which is also quite interesting is that we are not the only people to enjoy this
forbidden magic. We have a coen, let's say. This forbidden magic is shared in one way or the other
with performance profilers. So, for instance, some of the ones that use similar techniques are
Austin Austin the Austin provider and also by a spy
And it's quite interesting because the there is a different like both both tools can actually do something similar
So both by a stack and Austin can kind of take a snapshot and show you what the application is doing
At the time of this podcast they can do it for a live process. They cannot do it for a core file
Okay, so you have a core file you are out of lag
you can only use PyStack. If you have a live process, you can use PyStack,
but you can also use PySpy or Austin. Both can do that.
The main difference here, even if we share functionality,
is that we are not a profiler. We are a debugger, which means that we try really,
really hard to find that information, even in the most weird situation.
So, for instance, even if you have corrupted memory or your file or your core file is
corrupted or your process is really in a bad state, we can still give you the
information even if you don't have the back symbols. So we are slower than
both profilers because both PySpy and Austin need to basically take photos at
a very high speed because that's what the profiler does. It basically takes a
lot of photos very fast and then you're going to show you, "Okay, I took like 1
million photos in a second," and most of the time the photos show that you
wearing this function called various low function so that is going to tell you
well you're spending most of the time this function you should optimize that
function so for them is really really important to take those photos really
fast right sometimes even sacrificing correctness in some cases yeah
especially yeah they have some option to control the correctness because they
need to kind of sometimes guess and sometimes these photos they take with
the process running so you know you can be like half of the photo in one
and have all the other in the other,
and both have options to control if you want that or not.
- That's like frame-sharing in video games.
- Yeah, pretty much.
I always think about that particular metaphor
when I explain this.
But most people don't know what that is,
so I'm very happy to know that you're a connoisseur as well.
But, yeah, the main difference is that for them,
they do a very good work, just to be clear here.
But for them, their main concern is speed,
and the whole thing is surrounded by this idea
of doing this operation very fast, and because they do it very fast,
they can do it once, so you just ask for one photo,
they can give you that photo.
In our case, our concern is not speed, because we're not a profiler,
our concern is correctness and the photo.
So we really, really, really hard try to get the correct photo
and the photo if it's possible.
So that's the main difference.
This means that if you are already using...
A lot of people are using PySpy, for instance,
for this kind of, my Python application is frozen.
So in that case, you don't care if the photo is fast or slow
because it's already frozen, like who cares, right?
But on the other hand, if you have a crashing application,
especially a core file, then you're kind of over the luck
because these projects don't work at the time
that we're speaking for core files.
- Yeah, PyStack really seems to have a unique feature set,
a special place in the ecosystem, yeah.
- And most of the kind of extra features that PyStack has,
which are not the main functionality,
are basically around this idea of we are the buyer.
So for instance, we can give you extra metadata.
Some of this metadata actually also is shared
with these tools, but some other is not.
So we give you things like which thread has the gil
at the time, or if the GC is running on the thread or not.
We also tell you the call offsets and things like that.
So there is a lot of extra stuff that we can provide to you
so you can debug more easily your applications.
For instance, for the C code, if it's available,
which means that we can give you the column offsets
as well of the source code that generated the binaries.
You need a modern compiler to do that.
Only DWARF 4, I think, has this information.
DWARF is the debugging format for C,
which is kind of funny because the binary format is ELF.
So, you know, it's ELF and DWARF.
ELF stands for X-Axonal Unlinkable Format.
But DWARF doesn't have an acronym.
It's just funny.
Well, they come with this weird acronym,
I think they call it,
when you come with acronym after the fact.
So you just say, oh, DWARF is very funny.
Let's try to put it.
And I think now it stands on debugging
with arbitrary format or something.
Like, it's just really bad.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Try to fit the acronym into the thing, yeah, yeah.
But we call it the Truck Service, and we'll see where it goes from there.
- Exactly, yeah, literally.
So the idea is that we give you this extra kind of metadata around it.
And every time we do this, we try to do more.
For instance, we are now talking about with 3.12,
we are going to release in Python subinterpreters.
So we are discussing the possibility of showing subinterpreters also in PyStack
or maybe as in Coyote task.
I mean, these are not actual features that we are running right now,
but the idea is that we are considering these things
that for a profiler maybe it's just too hard
because it means that you need to inspect a lot more memory
and your photo is going to be prohibited as low.
But for us, it's not because we just take one photo
and it just needs to be a very good one.
- Yeah, excellent.
Yeah, see, you are making your life harder over and over.
Quick question from the audience in the live stream.
Tony says, "Could this be utilized in something
like AWS Lambda as error handling?
Grab the core dump if it bombs,
since you wouldn't have access to the runtime
after the Lambda executed.
- Yeah, I mean, I wouldn't, it's not the,
I like, as a compiler engineer, I would say,
I don't know anything about AWS,
so I don't know if it's the best way to do it,
but yeah, absolutely, this is something that you can do.
If you generate a core file,
then Fivestack can absolutely handle your core file.
No problem.
I think the only question I have there is if you can get the core file out after it has crashed.
But as long as there's some way to get the core file out, you definitely could inspect it with PyStack.
Oh, interesting. Is there a Python code level API for working with PyStack, or is it an outside-only thing?
Not at the time. It's just a command line application.
We could expose it. Like, PyStack is mainly a library with a lot of functionality.
So if there is people that want to use it for other things,
we are quite happy to expose it.
>> Yeah, I'm thinking things like for, say, C Profile,
you can turn off the profiling at startup
and then turn it back on with Python code,
or you could set an at exit callback, potentially,
to those kind of things.
>> We don't have this, but we do have some other cool thing
that I mean, let's say intersects 20% with what you said,
just to be clear, I'm not trying to answer your question fully,
but I think it's related.
We have this pytest plugin, which basically you can install.
And if some of your tests crashes, it's going to just run PyStack.
It crashes or freezes. It's going to run PyStack on that.
And it's going to show you what happened.
And we are talking also to have something similar to FoldHandler,
which is a standard library module that you can activate.
And if your process crashes, it shows you the Python stack.
But again, you're missing the C stack.
So we are going to allow you to also have this idea of like,
"Oh, I want to just run my Python application.
If it crashes, then I want PyStack to be run on the process
so I can see what was happening there."
By the way, this literally is something that was used.
For instance, URLib3, the project URLib3,
I think it's the most downloaded package on PyPI,
or it's close to it.
- I think so.
Yeah, so they use Membrane, which is our memory profiler.
And sometimes, you know, again,
when the mall was full on Wednesdays,
it was crashing on some weird test.
And, you know, at the time we asked them,
well, you know, Membrane uses C++ code underneath,
no surprise there.
And you're using Python code that uses Membrane,
so the crash is happening in some combination of both.
And we needed both stacks to debug what was going on.
And I thought, "Man, if only we have PyStack open source.
We could just tell them, 'Run this thing on your test suite.'"
But at the time, we didn't have it.
So we had to ask them for a core file.
They tried, but at the end, we ended up having to try to reproduce it on our side,
which was really hard because this was a race condition, basically.
And the race-- So I did all the weird techniques,
like running a Docker container with 0.001 CPU quota,
like running hundreds of test suites at the same time.
It was not a fun afternoon, let's say.
- If I recall correctly,
that took us like a full 24 hours to reproduce
just running the tests in a loop
until we managed to catch it the first time.
- Wow.
- You run into my room at the time,
you see this meme when there's this guy
with the blackboard without the threads,
like moving their hands like super crazy.
So that was me at the time,
running like six max splits with the test suite running.
So yeah, this tool is, when you need it,
it's really useful.
- Yeah, it's the kind of thing that a lot of times
you don't need, you're like, "Ah, that's interesting."
And then when you do need it, amazing.
- And this is key because what happens normally
with the bargaining tools, like GDB
is a very good example of this,
is that they are very hard to use.
Like the kind of like amount of knowledge that you need
is quite high.
They are not very ergonomic,
which means that it's not the easiest thing,
you need to get used to them and their language
and what they can do and what they cannot do.
It's the kind of thing that normally people learn when they need to,
which is the worst time to learn it because you need to solve the problem.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
It's very annoying.
So what we are trying to do quite a lot,
both on PyStack but also on Memory Profiler Membrane,
is to offer a really good UX around these tools.
That's why we are offering this pytest plugin
and thinking about doing this full handler thing.
Because it's not just the tool itself that you can execute,
but also we want you to not have to think about it.
It's not the tool to reach, it's the tool that is backing you up.
You set it once, you forget about the fact that it exists,
and when something happens, you are really happy
that you set that thing up.
And that's the experience that we want people.
And this is the other extra thing
that we are trying to put into Biostack,
that the UX is really good.
So, Matt, I think you want to--
>>And as far as the UX goes, I think
it's helpful to keep in mind that when people are using
these tools, it's almost certainly not
because they want to.
No one is having a good time when
they're using these tools.
They're using these tools because something has already
gone wrong and stopped them from doing
what they wanted to be doing in the first place,
and now they need to backtrack and figure out why.
You're kind of like an emergency room doctor.
People don't ever want to meet the emergency room doctor,
but they're happy they're there.
- I'm sorry.
Yeah, that was a key.
- Yeah.
Matt, I noticed looking at the GitHub repo for PySec
that there's a lot of languages involved here.
We got a good chunk of Python, C++, Cython, C,
only a little bit of C, I guess,
but you both have to keep a lot of technology interplay
in mind just working on this, right?
- Yeah, definitely.
My career has been as a C++ developer mostly.
So it tends to surprise people when we tell them that on the Python infrastructure team,
we spend most of our time working on C++ and relatively little time writing Python,
comparatively little.
If you actually looked at the way this code breaks down in the PyStack repo,
you would see that even though it's predominantly Python code,
the Python code is predominantly in the test suite.
most of the actual code for PyStack is in C++ or in Cython, not in Python.
I was going to guess that Python might be in there, like, reporting, CLI parsing.
Literally is what it is, yes.
Yeah, you're exactly right.
And then is there in some parts when really C++ will be overkill or too verbose or too annoying?
Like, I think parsing some stuff, I think, is preparing the input to the C++ code, let's say.
Yeah, parsing maps or things like that.
Right.
But that's the thing, like one of the reasons there is so much C++, actually, not only because
of performance, but because these tools need to play quite heavily on systems programming
techniques.
So PyStack plays a lot of, let's say, quote unquote, "dark magic."
It's not as dark as our other tool, the profiler, because the profiler is just in another level
of darkness that has gone through many dark rituals already.
But here as well, because at the end of the day, what these tools do,
what PyStack does, is that it's reading memory from a different program.
And that is quite complicated, because when you read memory
from a different program, there is nothing. It's just bytes.
Here are some bytes. And then you need to figure out what they are.
And most of the time, the bytes that you're reading are not backed
anything that you can use to make sense of.
Because, you know, for instance,
DDB, when it reads those bytes,
it has the debugging information.
So it knows that, oh, I'm reading bytes at this address,
but these bytes means like,
oh, a PI interpreter stayed abstract.
So I know that, you know,
the first eight bytes are this and that,
I know where to locate things.
We do that if it's available,
because we don't want to make our lives harder
just for no reason,
but because we have to support the cases
when that information is not there,
we employ these extra techniques
that are trying to make sense of those bytes
without knowing what they are.
So there is like a bunch of heuristics
and checks the heuristics.
And this can get like quite hardcore
because like, I think at some point
we had like four levels of checks
just because of one heuristic.
You know, the kind of thing when you say,
well, there is no way in the world
if these things are true is not what I'm searching for.
Well, I will tell you, yes, it will happen.
We have seen those when like,
I remember that we were having this discussion.
We have four checks for something, basically,
we are reading some bytes
and we are making some pointers,
and if a bunch of conditions are true,
we are sure that we have located
some important piece of information,
the interpreter state, I think,
or the thread state, whatever it is.
And Matt was saying, "Well, but you know,
"there is this case when these things can be true
"and it's still not it because, you know,
"it just happens to have these properties."
And I said, "Okay, let me calculate mathematically
"the probability of that happening."
And it was 0.001%, right?
And then we said, cool, never happening.
I think it was three months until it happened.
So, you know, like, yes, we need to take care
a lot of these things to ensure that.
- A lot of edge cases.
I'm starting to understand the black magic reference here.
- So that's part of it.
The other part is just like all the synonyms
with like, you know, stopping the process,
making the sender self CPython,
trying to extract information from CPython
in ways that CPython is not prepared to.
So you need to know a lot about everything,
a lot about systems programming,
so how to read memory from processes,
how to stop processes.
And also these tools,
this is quite important to mention as well,
these tools are supposed to GDB
because when you attach GDB to a project,
GDB can do whatever you want.
It can either inject code into the process,
it can call things in the process.
So many teams have GDB forbidden in production
because attaching GDB can do arbitrary things, right?
So you don't want that a lot of the time,
especially if you are under compliance
or you have like secrets.
- Right, right.
If you're in a banking industry, say,
or something like that,
and you try to catch a problem and it changes,
it makes decisions, that might not be awesome.
- And GDB can make your application crash.
Like, you can absolutely do that
because it can inject code.
And it's like, you see,
like I invite everyone interested on,
like try to learn how GDB calls functions in your process.
So you attach GDB, you can call a function in the process,
just learn how that is done.
and you're going to cry.
And if you want to cry even more because you say,
"Well, man, I still have some tears in my eyes,
and it's not enough," just learn how LLDB does it.
Like this is the other debugger from LLVM,
because that is just bananas.
That is just another level of craziness.
So these tools are very powerful,
but they are also a bit dangerous.
So the other thing that we really, really put a lot of effort
in is that these tools just read memory.
That they don't modify the process at all.
The only thing they do is stop it,
which is always a safe operation.
and then they restart the process, that's all.
And you can also choose not to stop it if you don't want to.
Because, for instance, you have some super performance
applications, so Biostack can still take snapshots
with the process running if you really need to,
sacrificing, obviously, that the photo may be blurry,
let's say, most of the time it will be, but it can be.
But you can also ask for that.
But the idea is that these are safe to use
on running processes because we don't touch
the memory at all, we just read it.
- I will say, you say that stopping a process
is always safe.
That's not necessarily true.
It does change the behavior of syscalls
that are in the middle of happening.
They'll get a--
They get a E--
E enter.
Yeah, they'll get an E enter.
And that can change the behavior of the program.
What's supposed to happen is that the program detects
that the syscall has been interrupted and retries it.
But not all of them do that all the time.
Because it's C and your error handling is all manual,
it's very easy to miss a place where you needed to retry something.
Well, C++ and Python does it.
So it's kind of, unless you have like your custom code,
most of the times it's safe to do.
That's true.
But this can happen also, you send signals to your process.
So for instance, you have any process,
and then it just happens to send a signal or someone interrupts the process,
like for instance, because you have it under a scheduler,
or you're using some very old kernel, for instance, that sends six stops.
Or you're running it in a cluster when you can put it in the freeze.
a C group, you will get the same situation.
And you will see, for instance,
you see Python all the time,
this loop that just checks,
for instance, you're reading bytes,
and then your read call finishes.
And then you normally assume, well, it has finished
because I have read all the bytes that I wanted.
Well, it may be not true
because you may have been interrupted.
So you need to try again.
- Sure, and at a higher level, it could be,
I was calling an API and it paused,
that actually caused it to time out,
or something like that, or a database connection reset,
or something weird at that level.
But I think a big difference here is,
these are a single call went crazy while you paused it,
whereas when you talk about injecting code,
you could have messed it up for the rest of the life of the process.
In unknown ways, yeah, absolutely.
Technically, attaching GDB is undefined behavior
because you can modify a retry memory in ways
that you don't know what's going on.
Obviously, it's not going to be the case
because GDB doesn't do that by default.
But the desk calling functions can alter--
especially if you're calling to a C API.
If you just happen to have a pointer
and then you want to print the pointer
and you call PyDumpObject, now you are like,
who knows what happened?
You are just calling-- you need the GIL, for instance,
to do that.
So it's very unclear what's going on.
So we don't do any of that.
Even in cases where you're able to successfully call a function with GDB,
it manages to get its stuff injected and do everything that it needs to do to set up the call.
You can wind up in a situation where you don't satisfy some of the invariants for that call,
and that call winds up segfaulting in code injected by GDB.
And it tries to recover from that, but it can't always.
So you can very easily get yourself in a situation where you thought you were doing something read-only
and managed to crash the process that you were trying to inspect.
You can see that we learned this the hard way for our other tool,
because one thing our memory profiler does,
this is memory, so not PyStack, this is the other tool.
So the other tool allows you to attach to a process, right?
You have a process that is happily running,
and then you say, "Now I want to profile this process that is already running."
So I just want to know, every time it makes allocations,
I just want to know that it's happening, or you just want to see it live.
And so what we do is that in that case,
we inject memory into the process
to just prepare the profiler and all do all the stuff.
And then we learn the hard way all the cases
when you cannot do that.
Like calling malloc under malloc.
Because if your setup process requires memory,
and your process is already allocated memory,
then you're calling malloc under malloc,
and that is undefined behavior.
Well, most of the times, that's a crash.
>>Yeah, I can't imagine how tricky that stuff is,
of the memory stuff.
Let's talk through some of the features.
We've touched on a lot of these,
but I just got a great long list of amazing things
that PyStack can do.
I'll just breeze over the ones we've talked about already,
but then potentially dive into the others.
So it works on both running processes,
and one of the really unique aspects
is on the core dump files.
That's very cool.
- And just to complete this part,
It works on all CorelAMP files, which is a huge...
Like, if you are in the world of how these things work, it's really hard
because CorelAMPs don't have a specification.
So this is very important.
There is no document that will tell you how CorelAMPs work.
This is the first surprise that you will have if you try to search for it.
So you will see how they normally work,
but the amount of weird stuff that can happen is just countless.
Because this is whatever the kernel is doing
and whatever the version of the kernel is doing.
So you can see super weird stuff.
And not just the kernel either.
What gcore does doesn't go through the kernel.
So if you're using GDB to generate a core file,
you might get something that's in an entirely different format
than what the kernel would have dumped.
And the core files can miss data.
So it's not really always a memory dump of the process,
like a complete one.
Because, for instance, imagine that you're in a system
and you have like five Python applications,
and then you generate the whole dump of the process.
Well, those five Python applications are going to have
loaded a lot of libraries that are common,
like libc, you know,
OpenSSL,
so a bunch of these libraries.
So are you going to just include all of them?
Well, technically you should, because that's what was loaded
in the memory, but that's going to generate
a huge core file, like gigabytes
in size. So a lot of the optimizations
that are done is that, well, you know,
if it's a cell library, just go and read the cell
library. So I'm not going to include it. Which means that tools need to know that this is happening.
And then when they see a pointer and they try to search in the core, they're going to find
there is nothing there. So they need to go to the library. So there is a lot of layers that you need
to go. So the second part when it says works on core and files, it works on all of them, which is
quite a huge statement. I guess we should touch on what platforms PyStack can run on. Just Linux.
- I mean, it could work.
And this is an important fact.
Like for instance, you're running on Windows or macOS,
you probably want to use the other tools
like that we mentioned like PySpy or Austin.
I think both run on all platforms.
But yes, this is because we want to ensure
that we do this very well and we cover all the cases
and we have enough with the one operative system.
Our other tools work on macOS as well.
- Our other tools work on macOS as well.
So the profiler memory works on macOS.
So we don't only do tools that work on Linux,
but this one only works on Linux.
- And to be clear, it does also work on Windows in WSL.
That is my main development environment.
So if not natively on Windows,
but at least if you're in a virtual machine on Windows,
you're fine.
- PyStack will work on WSL?
- Yeah, absolutely.
- Yeah. Okay, cool.
And I suppose it works on Docker running Linux on-
- On a bunch of machines, either like on, you know,
parallels on Mac.
And there's a lot of ways on different platforms.
- Yeah, I develop on Docker on Mac.
So for instance, I run PyStack on Docker on Mac,
no problem.
And even in the new ones, the M1 ones works nicely.
- Cool.
Let's see, what are some of the other ones here?
Includes calls to inline functions in the native stack.
- Ah, that's a funny one.
So one of the things we do is that,
One thing that can happen is that the C compilers,
they really like to do this because it's very efficient.
Sometimes following some heuristics,
they can say, "Well, you're calling this function,
"but this function is kind of small."
So generating all the assembly code to prepare the call
and finalize the call, plus all the locals
and the stack and whatnot is kind of very expensive.
So what they do basically is copy paste the code
in the caller, and they set up everything
so it works nicely, and the locals are not overwritten
just because you use the name "foo" in both.
So it kind of works, but the idea is that instead of calling
a function, just copy-paste the code.
But basically, the effect that this has on the backtrace
is that there is no function call, so there is no function.
So when you are calling that function, it disappears.
So it's like you never call it.
And this can be quite confusing when you're looking
at stack trace because you have function B
that calls function C, and C calls D,
and the middle one is inline, you're not going to see it,
and then you're going to say A calling C.
And you say, well, there's no way that happens
because I'm not calling C here.
So this can make this kind of like backtrace
is very confusing.
- Yeah.
This is in C, not in Python, right?
Because Python doesn't have inlining.
- Exactly.
No, exactly, Python doesn't have inlining, that's true.
We have something that we call inlining,
but it's not the same thing.
So I'm not going to explain that.
- Compiler optimization type thing.
- Right, right.
Yeah, so there is no inlining in Python, that's correct, let's just leave it like that.
And that is in C and C++ and Rust and whatnot.
So if there is debugging information, we can recover these inline calls,
which is something that by the way GDB can also do, but we can do it as well.
So there is enough debugging information.
We actually work in some cases when GDB doesn't,
just because GDB tries to be very correct in some of these cases,
but for whatever reason, it's overcorrect.
We can actually do it most of the time.
But yes, this is a feature that we do.
So you have one of these inline calls,
and we do more than that.
So for instance, if you have extreme debug information
that you can activate by passing, for instance,
you compile something with GCC, you can pass -G3,
that's debug information level 3, so put everything there.
We can even show you macros.
So you're using macros, which the macro expands to source, basically,
and then that source is passed to the compiler.
So there is no macro at the compiler level.
The compiler is going to see the source itself
because the processor kind of expands the macro.
But there is a technique in the debugging information
that can include the fact that there was a macro there.
So we can show you the macro.
We can say this was a macro.
So we can pretend that that was a function call.
That's quite cool.
That's great. I didn't see that coming. Yeah.
So when are we getting inlining of functions as an optimization in Python?
Probably not soon. But to be honest, there is some interesting things that are close.
There is this PEP that was approved to inline least comprehensions in function calls.
Yes, I was about to say.
But you see, as you can see, what I said, the consequence is that you basically copy paste
so the function call disappears.
This will happen in Python, by the way,
so when the PEP is implemented,
which, by the way, it is implemented,
if I recall correctly,
what happens is that you see a backtrace
with PyStack, for instance,
you're now going to see the list comprehension
frame, which is fine, because most of the time
it doesn't tell you anything, because it's going to tell you
here's a list comprehension, and then
you're calling a function called list comprehension,
so it's kind of weird.
But the interesting parts of list comprehensions
comprehensions being function calls basically.
I mean, it's not really functions call,
is they have their own frame.
But the interesting part here,
which was one big change from Python 2 to Python 3,
is that variables inside the comprehensions
are local to the comprehension.
Which means that you have a function,
a variable called x outside,
and then you use a variable called x inside,
and you assign to that by using the comprehension name.
The one outside is not modified, right?
This is maintained here, even if it's in line,
because even if it's in line, that is maintained.
But there is some cases when that behavior is very, very
tricky, particularly class scopes.
So you have a comprehension in a class scope, which already
is something weird to do, but you can absolutely do it.
Like class scopes are quite wild.
They are not-- they don't behave like function scopes.
So there was a bunch of edge cases that we saw.
So this comprehension inlining is deactivated on class scopes,
for instance, just because there was some consequences
of the inlining.
There is some in the discussion of the PEP
that is the case if you want to see it.
He explained this here.
It will be everywhere.
But it's quite important because aligning always
has consequences.
One of them is the frame is missing.
But this frame is not going to be missed by anyone
because it doesn't really add anything.
>>All right, so we sort of have them.
One of the things I think is really
cool about asking for information here,
and it's just really helpful, maybe
beyond even a good log message and stuff,
is not only do you see the stack trace,
the call stack here, when you--
this line and this file called this function and so on,
but you can see optionally the local variables, right?
Yes.
And what's extremely interesting about that is that
you would normally need to call the dunder wrapper method
of an object in order to figure out how to print it out
in a user-friendly way, but we can't do that, right?
We're working on crash processes.
We're reading one byte of memory at a time
to try to interpret it.
So in order to give you these locals,
PyStack needs to be able to understand
the CPython representation of a list
and know how to iterate over a list manually
to figure out what elements it contains
and recursively turn, recursively get the repper
for each of those methods,
or for each of those objects
that are in the collection as well.
It can't just rely on being able to call Python code
to get you this string.
- Right, and manually here means that it needs to know
that at least in Python release,
a bunch of pointers that points to a buffer
and the buffer is a bunch of Py objects
and then every object can be different.
So obviously this means that we cannot print all objects.
So if you have a custom object, we cannot print that.
We will print something.
We will tell you, for instance, the name of the class.
We will say, we will almost act like if there is no report.
So we will say custom object instance at location,
blah, blah, blah.
So the default report that you will get
if you create a class.
But for most of the common types, dictionary sets,
integer floats, et cetera, functions, all of these things,
we actually are able to print it.
Again, here the idea is adding debugging,
like help you debug these things.
So obviously it's not going to be the same as,
you know, having a debugger attached to something
that you can inspect, but most of the time
that you don't really need it because most of the time
you need to know the locales is because
you have a function call and the function call
has a specific argument that are passed to the function
and it modifies how the function behaves.
Like for instance, imagine that it has a keyword argument
and the keyword argument is strict or replaced
like the unique encode call.
So you really want to know if you pass one or the other
because otherwise it's going to trigger different call paths.
So that you use this, that's this locals option in PyS
that you will see what arguments were passed
to the functions and also the local variables
the functions and if most of the time it's just this you know built-in types
like lists or things like that then it's going to be very useful and it's going
to be mostly a laugh I think I mean it's kind of weird being the authors we
said this because obviously we're going to say nice things but I swear it's true
every time I particularly myself needed this option the things that we were
printing were the things that I needed to know so I didn't really need to know
Because you will say, well, if I have a NumPy array,
I won't see the array, right?
You will show me NumPy array.
Well, sure, but that won't help you debug the crashing code
because it doesn't really matter what is in the NumPy array.
- It's also fair to point out that if someone ever finds
like a built-in type that they needed to know the value of
in order to debug a problem, they can bring it to us
and we can see if we can implement it.
Benefits of open source.
- Yeah, two thoughts sort of came up for me
when I was listening, you all described that.
And this is just such a cool feature.
One, if it's a class, a custom object
that does not have slots,
you could grab just the dunderdick
and kind of print it as a dict.
Would be one, like if you...
- Yes, but no.
This is a very interesting question, actually, you ask.
For instance, in Python 3.12,
there is an optimization in which there is no dunderdick.
So this is quite funny actually.
It's quite funny because what happens is that
this is one of the optimizations
of the fastest CPython project.
This I think was done by Inada Sun and Mark Shannon.
So the idea here is that if you think about it,
if you have a object that has a under dig, right?
And it has a hash table,
unless you want the dictionary itself
and wants to just say, here is a dictionary.
I can just, you know, take a photo
and put it in a poster in my room
because I like it.
Unless you want the dictionary as itself,
you normally want--
- Should we maybe take a second
to explain what DunderDict is?
- All right, so most objects in Python,
like you have a class, like my class, Animal.
And Animal has a bunch of attributes like name and age,
and like, you know, kind of animal or whatever.
So in Python, those attributes are internally represented
with a hash table, which in Python we call a dictionary.
And you can ask the Python interpreter
you that internal dictionary. So normally you will say myAnimal.name, that will print
"Beebo" which is the name of my cat. But you can actually ask for that hash table that
is internally, and for that you will need to know myAnimal.dunderdick, so __dick__,
and that will give you the internal hash table with the name of all the attributes that you
have. So it will show name, kind, age as strings, and they will show you the actual values.
So that's normally how Python is represented internally.
And when you do attribute access, internally goes to this hash table in
different ways and fetches this out, right? But in Python 3.12, we said, well,
among other things, because this optimization touches many things,
really having a hash table represented with a full dictionary is a bit expensive
because if you think about it, if you access an attribute,
having the full hash table is not really needed. Among other things, because the
because the Hashtable has a bunch of things that allow it to work as a Python object,
but you don't really enjoy those things.
Like for instance, it has a pointer to the class and it tells you, "I'm a dictionary,"
but you already know it's a dictionary because that's what we put there.
So having the whole full dictionary with reference counts and all that stuff as a normal Python
object is expensive memory-wise, but also forces you to have a bunch of indirections.
And we already have a bunch of optimizations here.
For instance, one of the optimizations that we had
is that if you have a class, let's say Animal again,
most of the instances of the class, if not all,
are going to have the same attributes
because normally all animals, all cats have name,
age, and whatever, right?
You absolutely can add new attributes,
so this is something that you can, but normally you don't.
So what we do is that instead of storing the same names
in the dictionary of every instance,
we put those names in the class
because they are going to be common.
And then if you add kind of like extra attributes,
we kind of add it to the dictionary after the fact.
But there is already the diction,
that dictionary is already weird.
Like in the sense that sometimes the keys
are outside the dictionary just because they're shared.
This is the shared key dictionary optimization.
So we went a step ahead
and we just eliminated the dictionary.
So now what we'll have is the internals of the hash table,
like let's say row.
So there is no Python object kind of wrapping around it.
It's kind of like just raw pointers.
And if only if you ask for that Dunderdigs
and you want, you say,
"Well, I don't care about your optimization,
"just give me the hashtag."
Because code that does that still needs to see the hashtag.
We cannot break that.
So only when you ask for the dictionary,
we instantiate that dictionary and then we give it to you.
So before calling Dunderdig was just getting a pointer
and that's it, here's the dictionary.
Now calling Dunderdig computes stuff.
Like it just creates a dictionary on the fly
and give it to you.
which means, by the way, this is a nice piece of trivia.
Before, if you want to calculate the approximate,
because this is always approximate,
there is no full way to say how big is my Python object
and everything it contains,
because Python objects are a graph,
and that question, most of the time, doesn't make sense.
For instance, Python objects point to their module,
and you don't want to also include the module in the size,
right, among other things.
But if you want to know the size of, you know,
custom object, you normally say size of the instance
plus size of the dict.
But now in Python 3.12, just by asking for the size
of the dict by doing my instance.otherdict,
you just make it bigger.
So the real size of the object was actually smaller
than what you will get.
- I think that sounds like a great optimization,
but it does make your life harder here.
The other thought that I had is--
- Well, I mean, it's nothing really harder,
among other things, because we know already
how to print dictionaries, so that's fine.
If it's a dictionary, we print dictionaries.
And if it's not a dictionary, we are already in the business
of inspecting internal structures.
And we know absolutely how to interpret parts of hash tables.
And at the end of the day, what we have here
is parts of hash tables for now.
The problem here is more about what
happens if it changes in the future.
Because right now, for instance, it's easy.
But as we optimize more and more in the next release,
it's not going to be easy.
And right now, we can say, well, we
support this, this, that, and this other thing.
And we means that every time a new Python version is published,
we need to just go to all those things
and check if they were changed, and then change our code,
which is quite a lot of work.
But if we support more types, it means
that we need to do the same for more things.
And sometimes it's harder, right?
Especially custom objects, who knows what we find there.
So we kind of stay away from that,
because it may be a lot of work.
>>You're already busy, like we established.
All right.
Let me just flip through here and see if there's anything else
that we want to cover.
I feel like that's pretty much it.
Maybe just one more shout out to the pytest plugin
and whatever else you all think we should--
>>One last thing I think is interesting here just
to highlight, which is kind of cool,
is that in both our tools, so PyStack and the VarioLand,
this kind of links into the conversation
that we had before around the UX and how
we put a lot of emphasis on UX and making
these tools super easy.
So for instance, as we mentioned before,
we were talking about some of these features,
and then I say, for instance, the inline, right?
We said, well, if you have the right information,
we do this, but as I said before,
at the beginning of the podcast,
I said, most of the things don't have the right information.
So most people will say, well,
what is this point of this, right?
So, but then we said, okay,
so we really want to make this thing easy.
So we don't want to tell people,
well, if you want to use this feature,
then you need to install this thing
and just find your distribution,
how to, it's kind of annoying, right?
So one of the things we leverage in both our tools,
in PyStack and Membrane, is this thing
that Matt mentioned before, this debugging for the server.
So this means that in most distributions,
the most modern distributions,
so this means that the latest versions
of Ubuntu, Debian, Fedora, Arc, Linux,
it works on most of the new ones,
there is a way that debugging tools can say,
okay, I have here a binary, like let's say Python,
and this binary doesn't have the right information,
but I really need it.
So can you give me the debug information?
And it will download it automatically for you,
so you don't need to do anything.
The tool will do it for you.
So it will figure out what debug information it needs
from the processes analyzing.
It will go to the distribution.
It will say, hey, can you give me the information
for this, this, this, and this?
It will download it for you.
It will automatically merge it to the binary,
and it will use it for showing the inlines
or the C code or whatever it is.
This means that most of the time,
what you will see is that the first time
you analyze a Python process,
it will take a bit more time just because you're downloading these files,
and these files can be a bit big.
It will tell you that it's doing it, right?
And then it will--
these files then are cached for subsequent calls,
so you don't download it every single time.
But then it just works by magic.
So you have this kind of process,
and you have the information, and voila, it just works.
So you don't need to do anything.
You don't need to know about the fact that you need the right information
or the fact that your Python is optimized and doesn't have anything.
You just work.
It just works.
So you just need a new enough distribution.
And even if you don't have a new enough distribution,
there's a way to set up in the old ones.
But anyway, if you're using one of the latest support
to the Ubuntu, Debian, Arc, Fedora, Red Hat,
all of these have it, then magically it will just work,
which is something that we really, really are happy about
because it means that you don't need to know
about all of these things.
You will just get it.
>>That's really fantastic and go out and grab it
and just get it for you without you worrying about it.
>>It feels magical.
The first time I saw it, I need this.
Like, this is the future.
Because if you have to do this manually,
it just makes you miserable.
And I know how to do it.
I know how you need to do it,
and it still makes me miserable.
So I don't want to do it.
I just want the tool to figure it out.
And these both tools do it.
So that's kind of cool.
- Yeah, that's fantastic.
All right, guys, I think we're out of time here,
but, you know, final thoughts.
People are excited about PyStack.
Matt, what would you tell them?
Go ahead, check it out, how would they use it?
- Yeah, try it out, download it.
It's as easy as pip install PyStack,
find something that isn't working the way you expect it to,
point PyStack at it and see if you can figure it out.
And of course we're open to contributions.
So if you find especially issues,
if you find something that's broken, let us know.
If you find some platform it doesn't work on, let us know.
But yeah, it is my single go-to debugging tool
whenever something gets stuck
or doesn't do what I'm expecting it to do
when I run a Python command at a command prompt
and it just doesn't return.
I reach for this all the time.
I'm convinced it's a very useful tool for people.
- Yeah, it looks amazing.
Pablo, final thoughts?
- Yeah, the only thing I will add to what Matt said
is that one of the things,
in general, don't do only this thing for PyStack
and our tools, do it for every tool that you use.
Is that giving success a story,
so when you use the tool
in that particular challenging situation
and it really worked,
and you just say, "Wow, it just works."
Just go to the repo, again, not only us,
but any tool that you see that actually does this,
and tell the maintainers what you were trying to do
and that you were really happy.
Among other things, this really helps maintainers
because at the end of the day, you think about it,
we are putting all this work and then we just get
the case that it doesn't work, so it's a bit discouraging.
So it will keep us happy, and that's kind of important
in open source since these things are free.
The other thing is that it allows us to know
how people are using the tool.
When we discuss new features and how we evolve the tool,
we know how to do that.
For instance, for memory, we have the Success Stories page,
where you have... we're going to have the same as in Biostack.
So if you just happen to use it and you like it,
or you use it successfully to fix something, just tell us.
We are super happy to learn from you and to know
why it was useful to you and what kind of features you used
from the tool so we can keep improving.
Excellent.
Yeah, I think that's a really great idea.
I encourage people to do that as well.
So Pablo, Matt, thanks for being on the show.
- Always a pleasure, Michael.
- Thanks for having us.